.TH tifffastcrop 1 "December 30th, 2021" "LargeTIFFTools 1.4.1"
.SH NAME
.PP
.nf
  tifffastcrop \- extracts (crops) a rectangular region from a tiff 
file, avoiding loading the full source image input.tif into memory.
.fi

.SH USAGE
.PP
.nf
  tifffastcrop [options] -E x,y,w,l input.tif [output]
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
tifffastcrop takes a single-image TIFF file, reads the rectangular 
region of width w, length l, and top left corner at position (x,y) in 
pixels and stores it into a new file. The function is similar to what 
tiffcrop from LibTIFF does but tifffastcrop works also on very large 
TIFF files and it tries to read as little as possible from the source 
image into memory, whereas many programs open the whole image even if a 
very small region is requested. Therefore, it is much faster on large 
files.

.PP
If the "output" name is provided, the result is stored into a file with 
that name, in the format guessed from the extension of this filename if 
guess is possible (and in TIFF format if not), or in the format 
specified by options. Otherwise, the name given to the output file is 
created by adding the specification of the cropped region after the name 
of the original image and before the extension.


.SH PERFORMANCES

.PP
In principle, cropping a (small) region from a large TIFF file can also 
be achieved with several tools, as tiffcrop, ImageMagick and 
GraphicsMagick. However, most of the programs start with opening and 
deciphering the whole image either in memory or in a huge temporary 
file on the disk, which makes them quite slow, and often unable to 
complete the task by lack of memory.

.PP

In contrast, tifffastcrop reads as little as possible from the source 
image. If the input file is a tiled TIFF with reasonable tile size, it 
should read barely more than the cropped region. This yields speedup 
and guarantees successful termination of the process even on computers 
with modest memory. Eg. to crop a region of size 256x256 pixels in the 
middle of a JPEG-compressed tiled TIFF image of size 180224x70144, 
on a computer with 16 GiB of RAM and an i7 CPU, tifffastcrop 
needs 0.3 seconds while GraphicsMagick needs more than 80 minutes and 
tiffcrop and ImageMagick fail.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -v
Verbose monitoring.

.TP
.B -T
Do not report TIFF errors or warnings. Under Windows, they are reported
with noisy dialog boxes.

.TP
.B -E <x in pixels>,<y in pixels>,<width in pixels>,<length in pixels>

Specification of the rectangular region to extract (crop). The top left 
corner (x,y) has to be inside the source image. Special value -1 for 
width or length means "as big as possible". If the rectangle extends 
beyond the limits of the source image, its dimensions are adjusted. 
Examples: -E 10,20,512,256 or -E 0,0,-1,-1 (the latter means full image, 
whatever its dimensions).

.TP
.B -o <offset in bytes>

Specify that only image in TIFF directory at position offset in source 
file will be read and handled. Takes precedence over -d option.

.TP
.B -d <range 1>[,<range 2>...]

Specify non-empty ranges of TIFF directory numbers (starting at 0) from 
which extracts should be made. A range is specified as <starting 
number>-<ending number> or <starting number>:<ending number>. Ending 
number is included: for instance, range 3-3 means fourth directory. If 
starting number is omitted, is it assumed to be 0 (first directory). If 
ending number is omitted or -1, it means the last directory of the file. 

 If several -d options are given, their ranges cumulate.

.TP
.B -j[#]
Requests output of JPEG files rather than the default TIFF. Optional 
number # in the range 0 to 100 indicates wanted JPEG quality (default is 
75).

.TP
.B -p[#]
Requests output of PNG files rather than the default TIFF. Optional 
number # in the range 0 to 9 indicates wanted PNG compression level 
(default is currently 6).

 If several of -j, -p, and -c options are given, only the last one takes 
effect.

.TP
.B -c <method>[:opt[:opt]...]
Requests output of TIFF files compressed with method. Method can be 
`none' for no compression, `jpeg', `lzw', `zip'... as provided by the 
LibTIFF library (see libtiff (3TIFF)). By default, the same compression 
as in the input TIFF file is used.

 Method-specific details of the wished compression can be specified by 
adding one or several group of characters starting with a colon `:' 
after the methods's name, as follows.

Option to (TIFF compressed with) JPEG method: 
 :# set compression quality level as in option -j (see above).

LZW, Deflate (zip) and LZMA2 options:
 :# set predictor value
 :p# set compression level.

For example, -c lzw:2 to get LZW-encoded data with horizontal 
differencing, -c zip:3:p9 for Deflate encoding with maximum compression 
level and floating point predictor, -c jpeg:r:50 for JPEG-encoded RGB 
data at quality 50%.

 If several of -j, -p, and -c options are given, only the last one takes 
effect.

.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
.B tiffsplittiles(1), tiffmakemosaic(1), tiffsplit(1), tiffcrop(1), 
libtiff(3TIFF)

.PP
.B Home Page
.nf
http://www.imnc.in2p3.fr/pagesperso/deroulers/software/largetifftools/
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Christophe Deroulers
